feat: add blog post about not needing eslint-config-prettier or eslint-plugin-prettier (#140)
JoshuaKGoldberg/joshuakgoldberg-dot-com: src/content/blog/you-probably-don't-need-eslint-config-prettier-or-eslint-plugin-prettier/index.mdx

If your ESLint configuration references [`eslint-plugin-prettier`](https://github.com/prettier/eslint-plugin-prettier), I strongly recommend you instead enable Prettier separately from ESLint.
Running the `prettier/prettier` rule can introduce significant performance pain to your project.

No matter what tooling your ESLint configuration enables, if you haven't overhauled it in a few years, I strongly recommend:

1. Making sure `"eslint:recommended"` is in your rule extensions
2. If you're using TypeScript:
   1. Making sure at least [`plugin:@typescript-eslint/recommended`](https://typescript-eslint.io/linting/configs#recommended) is enabled - or even better, [`plugin:@typescript-eslint/recommended-type-checked`](https://typescript-eslint.io/linting/configs#recommended-type-checked)
   2. Checking the [`.eslintrc.cjs` from `create-typescript-app`](https://github.com/JoshuaKGoldberg/create-typescript-app/blob/main/.eslintrc.cjs), for any rules or plugins generally applicable to your project
3. Checking [github.com/dustinspecker/awesome-eslint](https://github.com/dustinspecker/awesome-eslint) for any additional plugins you relevant to your project

Happy linting, everyone! 🎉

> ### Acknowledgements

Author: [Todo] I should also thank the tools for being legitimately useful for many.

---
description: "Explaining how two popular Prettier integrations for ESLint work, and why I avoid both of them."
image:
  alt: Josh smiling on stage and giving a presentation showing the "Type Checking React (v2)" from the linked slides.

>   src: react-miami-me-speaking.jpg

Author: [Todo] I need to find a good image for this... and maybe images inline.

pubDate: 2023-12-28
tags: [

> 	"biome",

Author: [Todo] I'd started writing up an explainer about Rust-based linters and type checking performance, but ended up removing it. That'll be a separate blog post. #141.

Note that _plugins_ and _shareable configs_ are two different things.

- _**Plugins**_ make rules available without configuring those rules.
- _**Shareable configs**_ configure rules that come with ESLint and/or were previously made available in plugins.

### ESLint Customization Example: TypeScript

If you use ESLint to lint TypeScript code then you're hopefully using all three customizations:

- **Parser**: [`@typescript-eslint/parser`](https://typescript-eslint.io/packages/parser) to support parsing TypeScript code
- **Plugin**: [`@typescript-eslint/eslint-plugin`](https://typescript-eslint.io/packages/eslint-plugin) to load in rules specific to TypeScript
- **Shared Config(s)**: Shared settings packaged with `@typescript-eslint/eslint-plugin` that configure many rules at once, such as [`plugin:@typescript-eslint/recommended`](https://typescript-eslint.io/linting/configs#recommended).

Note that the typescript-eslint _shareable configs_ come from the `@typescript-eslint/eslint-plugin` npm package.
Hence the `plugin:` prefix in front of them: that's how ESLint knows where to find the configs.

> ## `eslint-config-prettier`

Author: [Todo] I should reach out to the maintainers of this package to make sure I'm not misrepresenting it or otherwise being rude.

Author: I've reached out. Will keep this open as a reminder that I should give them each a business week to get back to me.

Edit: I'll re-ping after New Years.

**If you don't use a legacy ESLint shared config that enables formatting rules, you probably don't need `eslint-config-prettier`.**
Adding `eslint-config-prettier` at the end of the `"extends"` list doesn't do anything if nothing enabled formatting rules to begin with.
Therefore, most projects don't gain any benefit from `eslint-config-prettier`.

Furthermore, two insidious points of confusing can arise from using `eslint-config-prettier` redundantly:

- Seeing a reference to _"prettier"_ in an ESLint configuration can confuse developers new to the area.
- Nothing stops projects from manually re-enabling formatting rules under the ESLint configuration's `"overrides"` or `"rules"` properties.

I now recommend against including `eslint-config-prettier` in most new projects.

> 💡 Not sure whether you can safely remove `"prettier"` from your `"extends"`?
> Try removing it, running ESLint with [`--print-config`](https://eslint.org/docs/latest/use/command-line-interface#--print-config), and seeing which lint rules are newly enabled.

> ## `eslint-plugin-prettier`

Author: [Todo] I should reach out to the maintainers of this package to make sure I'm not misrepresenting it or otherwise being rude.

Author: I reached out privately. Shoutout https://github.com/JoshuaKGoldberg/github-username-to-emails & https://github.com/JoshuaKGoldberg/github-username-to-emails-site for saving time finding emails...

Since this is the last third of December, I'll ping folks again the first week of January. Just in case they're already out.

---
description: "Explaining two popular Prettier integrations for ESLint, and why I avoid both of them."
image:
  alt: Josh smiling on stage and giving a presentation showing the "Type Checking React (v2)" from the linked slides.
  src: react-miami-me-speaking.jpg

> pubDate: 2023-01-14

Author: I'm thinking I'll want to publish this post _after_ #141. If I do this one before, some folks are probably going to low-effort reply with mentions of Rust linters.

Edit: oh, and the year will be 2024. heh.

- Seeing a reference to _"prettier"_ in an ESLint configuration can confuse developers new to the area.
- Nothing stops projects from manually re-enabling formatting rules under the ESLint configuration's `"overrides"` or `"rules"` properties.

I now recommend against including `eslint-config-prettier` in most new projects.

> 💡 Not sure whether you can safely remove `"prettier"` from your `"extends"`?
> Try removing it, then running `npx eslint-config-prettier some/file.js` to see if it points out any conflicting rules.
> Running ESLint with [`--print-config`](https://eslint.org/docs/latest/use/command-line-interface#--print-config), can alternately print out the full list of lint rule configurations for a file.

## `eslint-plugin-prettier`

`eslint-plugin-prettier` is an ESLint _plugin_ that provides two things:

- A custom rule, `prettier/prettier`, that runs all of Prettier inside a single ESLint rule
- A shareable config, `plugin:prettier/recommended`, that enables the `prettier/prettier` rule

For example, in ESLint's legacy config format, you might enable them like:

```json
{

> 	// 1. Load in the prettier/prettier rule from the plugin
> 	"plugins": ["prettier"],
> 
> 	// 2. Turn on the prettier/prettier rule
> 	"extends": ["plugin:prettier/recommended"]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	// 1. Load the prettier/prettier rule and turn it on
	"extends": ["plugin:prettier/recommended"]
```

The recommended config adds `"plugins": ["prettier"]` already - consumers don't need to do that themselves.

Author: Ha, I'd noticed this when reading through the eslint-plugin-prettier docs and couldn't believe it at first. What a nice feature. Thanks 😄 https://github.com/typescript-eslint/typescript-eslint/issues/8149

- If any other rules introduce auto-fixes, one or more additional cycles may be introduced from `prettier/prettier` fixing formatting issues with those auto-fixes

> 😬 Keep in mind that lint rules don't have visibility into formatting settings.
> Their auto-fixers aren't likely to produce code that aligns to your formatter.

Type-checked linting is by nature generally at least as slow as running the TypeScript type checker on all linted files.
Running linting additional extra times adds up - and contributes to false negative perceptions around ESLint's and typescript-eslint's performance.

**I strongly recommend you do not use `eslint-plugin-prettier`**.
We even explicitly recommend against `eslint-plugin-prettier` in the [typescript-eslint formatting FAQs](https://typescript-eslint.io/linting/troubleshooting/formatting#eslint-plugin-prettier) and [typescript-eslint performance troubleshooting docs](https://typescript-eslint.io/linting/troubleshooting/performance-troubleshooting#eslint-plugin-prettier).

If `prettier/prettier` is enabled in your ESLint configuration, the best step you can take is to remove it and uninstall the `eslint-plugin-prettier` package altogether.

> Failing that, you can disable the rule manually (`"prettier/prettier": "off"` under `"rules"`).

Reviewer: It might be worth noting that extending from `plugin:prettier/recommended` will [also configure `eslint-config-prettier` too](https://github.com/prettier/eslint-plugin-prettier/blob/8210e44309b168c7c06185eae8249b2d0eb65815/eslint-plugin-prettier.js#L87).

So `{extends: ["plugin:prettier/recommended"], rules: {'prettier/prettier': 'off'}` is not the same thing as removing extending from plugin:prettier altogether.

Author: Good point, thanks!

1. Making sure `"eslint:recommended"` is in your rule extensions
2. If you're using TypeScript:
   1. Making sure at least [`plugin:@typescript-eslint/recommended`](https://typescript-eslint.io/linting/configs#recommended) is enabled - or even better, [`plugin:@typescript-eslint/recommended-type-checked`](https://typescript-eslint.io/linting/configs#recommended-type-checked)
   2. Checking the [`.eslintrc.cjs` from `create-typescript-app`](https://github.com/JoshuaKGoldberg/create-typescript-app/blob/main/.eslintrc.cjs), for any rules or plugins generally applicable to your project
3. Checking [github.com/dustinspecker/awesome-eslint](https://github.com/dustinspecker/awesome-eslint) for any additional plugins relevant to your project

Happy linting, everyone! 🎉

### Acknowledgements

Much appreciation to [Anisha Malde](https://www.anisha.dev) for suggesting I write an explainer in this area and helping ideate contents.
Thanks!
🙌

Thanks also to [Simon Lydell](https://github.com/lydell), the original creator and a long-time maintainer of `eslint-config-prettier`, for reviewing the post and suggesting the `npx eslint-config-prettier` approach.

> We should also note that although I personally disagree with `eslint-config-prettier` and `eslint-plugin-prettier`, they are legitimately useful tools for many.

Author: A couple clarifications:

* I disagree with _using_ them _today_
* I'd still rather work in a project that uses them than a project that doesn't format at all
